Calvin and Common Grace
Herman Bavinck
The Princeton Theological Review Vol. 7 No. 3 (1909), pp 437-465
Translated by Geerhardus Vos
Christianity has from the beginning laid claim to be the one true religion. Already in the 
Old Testament the consciousness exists that Jehovah alone is Elohim and that the gods of the 
heathen are things of naught and vanity; and in the New Testament the Father of Jesus Christ is 
the only true God, whom the Son reveals and declares, and access to whom and communion 
with whom the Son alone can mediate. This conviction of the absoluteness of the Christian 
religion has entered so deeply into the consciousness of the Church that the whole history of 
Christian doctrine may be viewed as one great struggle for upholding it over against all sorts of 
opposition and denial. For the life of the Church as well as for every individual man the 
fundamental question is: What think ye of the Christ? This was the issue in the christological 
and anthropological controversies of the ancient Church, this the issue at the time of the 
Reformation and in the age of the "Enlightenment", and this is still the issue at the present day 
in the spiritual battles witnessed by ourselves. No progress can be marked in this respect: the 
question of the ages is still the question of our time,—Is Christ a teacher, a prophet, one of the 
many founders of religions; or is he the Only-begotten from the Father, and therefore the true 
and perfect revelation of God?
But if Christianity bears such an absolute character, this fact immediately gives rise to a 
most serious problem. The Christian religion is by no means the sole content of history; long 
before Christianity made its appearance there existed in Greece and Rome a rich culture, a 
complete social organism, a powerful political system, a plurality of religions, an order of moral 
virtues and actions. And even now, underneath and side by side with the Christian religion a rich 
stream of natural life continues to flow. What, then, is the relation of Christianity to this wealth 
of natural life, which, originating  in  creation, has, under  the law there  imposed upon  it, 
developed from age to age? What is the connection between nature and grace, creation and 
regeneration,  culture  and  Christianity,  earthly  and  heavenly  vocation,  the  man  and  the 
Christian? Nor can it be said that this problem has now for the first time forced itself upon us, 
owing to the wide extension of our world-knowledge, the entrance of the heathen nations into 
our field of vision and the extraordinary progress made by civilization. In principle and essence 
it has been present through all the ages,—in the struggle between Israel and the nations, in the 
contest between the Kingdom of Heaven and the world-power, in the warfare between the 
foolishness of the cross and the wisdom of the world.
To define this relation, Scripture draws certain lines which it is not difficult to trace. It 
proceeds on the principle that for man God is the supreme good. Whatever material or ideal 
possessions the world may offer, all these taken together cannot outweigh or even be compared 
with this greatest of all treasures, communion with God; and hence, in case of conflict with this, 
they are to be unconditionally sacrificed. "Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none 
upon earth that I desire besides thee." This, however, does not hinder earthly possessions from 
retaining a relative value. Considered in themselves they are not sinful or unclean; so long as 
they do not interfere with man's pursuit of the kingdom of heaven, they are to be enjoyed with 
thanksgiving. Scripture avoids both extremes, no less that of asceticism on the one hand than 
that of libertinism on the other hand. The recognition of this as a principle appears most clearly 
in its teaching that all things, the entire world with all its treasures, including matter and the 
body, marriage and labor, are created and ordained of God; and that Christ, although, when He 
assumed a true and perfect human nature, He renounced all these things in obedience to God's 
command, yet through His resurrection took them all back as henceforth purified of all sin and 
consecrated through the Spirit. Creation, incarnation and resurrection are the fundamental facts 
of Christianity and at the same time the bulwarks against all error in life and doctrine.
It needs no pointing out, however, that in the first age Christians had to assume a 
preponderantly  negative  attitude  towards  the  culture  of  their  time.  They  were  neither 
sufficiently numerous nor on the whole sufficiently influential in the world to permit of their 
taking an active, aggressive part in the affairs of state and society, of science and art. Besides 
this, all institutions and elements of culture were so intimately associated with idolatry and 
superstition that without offense to conscience it was impossible to take part in them. For the 
first Christians nothing was to be expected from the Graeco-Roman world but persecution and 
reproach. Consequently, nothing was left for them but to manifest their faith for the time being 
through the passive virtues of obedience and patience. Only gradually could the Church rise to 
the higher standpoint of trying all things and holding fast to that which is good, and adopt an 
eclectic procedure in its valuation and assimilation of the existing culture.
Often in the past, and again in our own time has the charge been brought against the 
Christian Church, that in applying this principle, it has falsified the original Gospel. Harnack 
finds in the history of doctrine a progressive Hellenizing of original Christianity. Hatch regards 
the entire Christian cultus, particularly that of the sacraments, in the light of a degeneration 
from the primitive Gospel. To Sohm the very idea of ecclesiastical law appears contradictory to 
the essence of the Christian Church. But such assertions partake of gross exaggeration. If in all 
these respects nothing but degeneration is to be found, it will be easy to show that to a 
considerable degree the degeneration must have set in with the Apostles and even with the 
writers of the synoptic Gospels, as has been freely acknowledged by not a few writers of recent 
date. The Christian Church is indeed charged with having falsified the original Gospel, but those 
who bring the charge retain practically nothing of this Gospel or are at least unable to say in 
what this Gospel consisted. It is as a rule made out to have been a simple doctrine of morals with 
an ascetic tinge. Then the problem arises, how such a Gospel could ever have come into real 
contact with culture, especially to the extent of suffering corruption from culture. A conception 
is thus formed, both of the original Gospel and of the attitude of the Christian Church toward 
pagan culture, which is based wholly on fancy and is at war with all the facts.
For not only is the Gospel not ascetic, but even the Christian Church, at least in its first 
period, never adopted this standpoint. However much it might be on its guard against paganism, 
it never despised or condemned natural life as in itself sinful. Marriage and family life, secular 
calling and military estate, the swearing of the oath and the waging of war, government and 
state, science and art and philosophy,—all these were recognized from the beginning as divine 
institutions and as divine gifts. Hence theology early began to form relations with philosophy; 
the art of painting, as practiced in the catacombs, attached itself to the symbols and figures of 
antiquity; architecture shaped the churches after pagan models; music availed itself of the tunes 
which Graeco-Roman art had produced. On every hand a strong effort is perceptible to bring the 
new religion into touch with all existing elements of culture.
It was possible for the first Christians to do this because of their firm conviction that God 
is the Creator of heaven and earth, who in times past has never left Himself without witness to 
the heathen. Not only was there an original revelation, which, though in corrupted form, yet 
survived in tradition; it was also regarded as probable that certain philosophers had possessed a 
degree of acquaintance with the writings of the Jews. But in addition to this there existed in 
paganism a continued revelation through nature and the reason, in heart and conscience,—an 
illumination of the Logos, a speech from the wisdom of God through the hidden working of 
grace.  Anima naturaliter Christiana, the man is older than the philosopher and the poet, 
Tertullian exclaimed, thus formulating a truth which lived in the hearts of all. No doubt among 
the heathen this wisdom has in many respects become corrupted and falsified; they retain only 
fragments of truth, not the one, entire, full truth. But even such fragments are profitable and 
good. The three sisters, logic, physics and ethics, are like unto the three wise men from the east, 
who came to worship in Jesus the perfect wisdom. The good philosophical thoughts and ethical 
precepts found scattered through the pagan world receive in Christ their unity and center. They 
stand for the desire which in Christ finds its satisfaction; they represent the question to which 
Christ gives the answer; they are the idea of which Christ furnishes the reality. The pagan world, 
especially in its philosophy, is a pedagogy unto Christ; Aristotle, like John the Baptist, is the 
forerunner of Christ. It behooves the Christians to enrich their temple with the vessels of the 
Egyptians and to adorn the crown of Christ, their king, with the pearls brought up from the sea 
of paganism.
In saying this, however, we by no means wish to imply that the attitude of the Church 
towards the world has at all times and in every respect measured up to the Church's high calling. 
A priori it is not to be expected that it should, inasmuch as every human development shows 
abnormal traits and the life of every individual Christian is tainted with error and sin. When the 
Church of Rome maintains that the Gospel has been preserved by her and unfolded in its 
original purity, this claim is made possible only through ascribing infallibility to the Church. But 
by  the  very  act  of  subscribing  to  this  dogma,  Rome  acknowledges  that  without  such  a 
supernatural gift the development could not have been kept pure. Further, by attributing this 
gift to the Pope alone, Rome admits the possibility of error not only in the ecclesia discens but 
also in the ecclesia docens, even where the latter convenes in ecumenical council. And Rome's 
confining the effect of this infallible guidance to papal deliverances  ex cathedra involves the 
confession that the Roman Catholic system, as a whole, with all its teaching and practice, enjoys 
no immunity from corruption. The dogma of papal infallibility is not the ground or cause, but 
only one of the many consequences and fruits of the system. And this system itself has not grown 
up from one principle; it has been developed in the course of the ages by the cooperation of 
numerous factors,—a development the end of which has not yet been reached.
Although  Roman  Catholicism  has  been  built  up  out  of  varied,  even  heterogeneous 
elements, it nevertheless forms a compact structure, a coherent view of the world and of life, 
shaped in all its parts by a religious principle. This religion embraces in the first place a series of 
supernatural, inscrutable mysteries, chief among which are the Trinity and the Incarnation. 
These truths have been entrusted to the Church to be preserved, taught and defended. To 
discharge these functions the Church, in the person of the Pope, as successor of Peter, needs the 
gift of infallibility. The doctrines are authoritatively imposed by the Church on all its members. 
The faith which accepts these mysteries has for its specific object the Church-dogma; it does not 
penetrate through the dogma to the things themselves of which the dogma is the expression; it 
does not bring into communion with God; it does not represent a religious but an intellectual 
act, the  assensus, the  fides historica. Faith is not a saving power in itself, but is merely 
preparatory to salvation; nevertheless, it is something meritorious because and in so far as it is 
an act of submission to ecclesiastical authority.
The Church, however, is not merely the possessor of supernatural truth; in the second 
place it is also the depository and dispenser of supernatural grace. As the Church doctrine is 
infinitely exalted above all human knowledge and science, so the grace kept and distributed by 
the Church far transcends nature. It is true this grace is, among other things, gratia medicinalis, 
but this is an accidental and adventitious quality. Before all else it is gratia elevans, something 
added to and elevating above nature. As such it entered into the image of God given to Adam 
before the Fall, and as such it again appears in the restoration to that original state. In view of its 
adding to exalted nature a supernatural element, it is conceived as something material, enclosed 
in the sacrament, and as such dispensed by the priest. Thus every man becomes, for his 
knowledge of supernatural truth and for his reception of supernatural grace, that is, for his 
heavenly salvation, absolutely dependent on the Church, the priest and the sacrament. Extra 
ecclesiam nulla salus.
But even this grace, which, to be sure, remains subject to loss and recovery until the end 
of life, does not assure man of attainment to fellowship with God. All it does is to impart to him 
the power whereby, if so choosing, he may merit, through good works, supernatural salvation, 
the  visio Dei. Since work and reward must be proportionate, the good works which merit 
supernatural salvation must all be of a specific kind and therefore need to be defined and 
prescribed by the Church. The Church, besides being the depository of truth and the dispenser of 
grace, is in the third place also law-giver and judge. The satisfactions which the Church imposes 
are according to the character of the sins committed. The rapidity or slowness with which a man 
attains to perfection, how much time he shall spend in purgatory, how rich a crown he will 
receive in heaven,—all this depends on the number of extraordinary, supernatural works which 
he performs. Thus a spiritual hierarchy is created. There exists a hierarchy in the world of 
angels, and a hierarchy in the ecclesiastical organization, but there is a hierarchy also among the 
saints on earth and the blessed in heaven. In an ascending scale the saints, divided into orders 
and ranks, draw near to God, and in proportion as they become partakers of the divine nature 
are admitted to the worship and adoration of the deity.
In view of what has been said it is evident that truth, grace and good works bear, 
according to Rome, a specific, supernatural character. And because the Church is the God-
appointed depository of all these blessings, the relation between grace and nature coincides with 
that between the Church and the world. The world, the state, natural life, marriage and culture 
are not sinful in themselves; only they are of a lower order, of a secular nature, and, unless 
consecrated by the Church, easily become an occasion for sinning. This determines the function 
of the Church with reference to the world. It is the calling of the Church to declare unto the 
world that in itself the world is profane, but that nevertheless, through the consecration of the 
Church, it may become a vehicle of grace. Renunciation of the world and sovereignty over the 
world with Rome spring from one and the same principle. The celibacy of the priesthood and the 
elevation of marriage to the rank of a sacrament are branches of the same stem. The whole 
hierarchical  idea  is  built  on  the  sharp  distinction  between  nature  and  grace.  Where  the 
supernatural character of the Church and the efficacy of the sacrament and the priestly office are 
concerned, this system brooks neither compromise nor concession; but aside from this, it leaves 
room for a great variety of steps and grades, of ranks and orders in holiness and salvation. The 
Church contains members that belong to it in body only, and members belonging to it with a 
part of their powers or with all their powers; it makes concessions to the weak and worships the 
saints; a lax morality and a severe asceticism, an active and a contemplative mode of life, 
rationalism and supernaturalism, unbelief and superstition equally find a place within its walls.
Towards the close of the Middle Ages this system had become corrupt in almost every 
respect. In the sphere of truth it had degenerated into nominalistic scholasticism; in the sphere 
of grace into demoralizing traffic in indulgences; in the sphere of good works into the immoral 
life of priests and monks. Numerous efforts were made to remedy these faults and to reform the 
Church from within. But the Reformation of the sixteenth century differed from all these 
attempts in that it not merely opposed the Roman system in its excrescences but attacked it 
internally in the foundations on which it rested and in the principles out of which it had been 
developed. The Reformation rejected the entire system, and substituted for it a totally different 
conception of veritas, gratia, and bona opera. It was led to this new conception not through 
scientific reflections or philosophical speculations, but through earnest, heartfelt concern for the 
salvation of souls and the glory of God. The Reformation was a religious and ethical movement 
through and through. It was born out of the distress of Luther's soul.
When a helpless man, out of distress of soul, looks to the Gospel for deliverance, the 
Gospel will appear to him in a totally new light. All at once it ceases to be a set of supernatural, 
inscrutable mysteries to be received on ecclesiastical authority, with renunciation of the claims 
of reason, by meritorious assent. It straightway becomes a new Gospel, good tidings of salvation, 
revelation of God's gracious and efficacious will to save the sinner, something that itself imparts 
the forgiveness of sin and eternal life and therefore is embraced by lost man with joy, that lifts 
him above all sin and above the entire world to the high hope of a heavenly salvation. Hence it is 
no longer possible to speak of the Gospel with Rome as consisting of supernatural mysteries to 
be responded to by man in voluntary assent. The Gospel is not law, neither as regards the 
intellect nor as regards the will; it is in essence a promise, not a demand but a gift, a free gift of 
the divine favor; nay, in it the divine will itself through the Gospel addresses itself to the will, the 
heart, the innermost essence of man, and there produces the faith which rests in this divine will 
and builds on it and puts its trust in it through all perils, even in the hour of death.
By reason of this new conception of the Gospel, which in principle was but a return to the 
old, Scriptural conception, it could not be otherwise than that faith also should obtain a totally 
new significance. If the Gospel is not a veritas to which the gratia is added later on, but is itself 
gratia in  its  very  origin,  the revelation  of God's gracious will,  and at the same time the 
instrument for making this will effective in the heart of man, then faith can no longer remain a 
purely intellectual assent. It must become the confidence in the gracious will of God, produced 
by God himself in man's heart; a surrender of the whole man to the divine grace; a resting in the 
divine promise; a receiving of a part in God's favor; admission into communion with him; an 
absolute assurance of salvation. With Rome, faith is but one of the seven preparations, which 
lead on to the reception of the gratia infusa in baptism, and hence bears no religious character; 
it is naught but a fides historica, which stands in need of the supplement of love in order to 
become complete and sufficient unto salvation. To the Reformers faith from its very first 
inception is religious in nature. As  fides justificans salvifica it differs not in degree but in 
principle and essence from the fides historica. It has for its object God himself, God in Christ, 
and Christ in the garb of Holy Scripture, Christum Evangelio suo vestitum; it is in its essence 
firma certaque cognitio, cordis magis quam cerebri, et affectus magis quam intelligentiae, to 
be defined rather as certitudo than as apprehensio. Faith places beyond doubt Dei bonitatem 
perspicue nobis propositam and enables us to stand before God's presence tranquillis animis. 
Thus it is seen to be the principle of the true fear of God, for primus ad pietatem gradus [est] 
agnoscere Deum esse nobis Patrem, ut nos tueatur, gubernet ac foveat, donec colligat in  
aeternam haereditatem regni sui.
To all the Reformers, therefore, there lies behind the Gospel and behind faith the gracious 
and efficacious will of God. Nay, more than this, in the Gospel and in faith the divine will is 
revealed and realized. This is the reason why the religious conception of the Gospel and of faith 
is with the Reformers most intimately connected with their belief in predestination. We in our 
time no longer understand this. We have lost the habit of religious thinking, because we feel less 
for ourselves the personal need of communion with God, and so feel less of the impulse to 
interpret the world from a religious point of view. Instead, our age has learned to think in the 
terms of natural science; it has substituted for the divine will the omnipotent law and the 
omnipotent force of nature, and thus thrown itself into the arms of determinism. It claims to 
have long since outgrown the belief in predestination. And undoubtedly there exists between 
these  two,  however  often  they  may  be  mixed  and  confounded,  a  difference  of  principle. 
Determinism is in principle rationalistic; it cherishes the delusion of being able to explain 
everything from the reign of natural law, holding that all existing things are rational since reason 
perceives that they could not be otherwise than they actually are. Predestination, on the other 
hand, is a thoroughly religious conception. While able to recognize natural law and to reckon 
with the forces of nature, it refuses to rest in this or to consider natural necessity the first and 
last word of history.
He who has learned to regard communion with God as the supreme good for his own 
person, must feel bound to work his way back, behind the world and all its phenomena, until he 
arrives at the will of God. He must seek an explanation of the origin, development and goal of 
the world-process, which shall be in accordance with that will and hence bear an ethico-religious 
character. This is the reason that, so soon as a religious movement appears in history, the 
problem of predestination comes to the front. In a way, this is true of all religions, but it applies 
with special pertinence to the history of the Christian religion. In proportion as the Christian 
religion is distinctly experienced and appreciated in its essence as true, full religion, as pure 
grace, it will also be felt to include, and that directly, without the need of dialectic deduction, the 
confession of predestination. Hence all the Reformers were agreed on this point. It is true that 
with Luther it was afterwards, for practical reasons, relegated to the background, but even he 
never recanted or denied it. It was in the controversy about the servum or liberum arbitrium 
that the Reformation and humanism parted ways once for all. Erasmus was and continued to be 
a Romanist in spite of his ridicule of the monks. As late as 1537 Luther wrote to Capito: nullum 
agnosco meum justum librum nisi forte de libero arbitrio et catechismum. The doctrine of 
predestination, therefore, is no discovery of Calvin; before Calvin it had been professed by 
Luther and Zwingli. It sprang spontaneously from the religious experience of the Reformers. If 
Calvin introduced any modification, it consists in this, that he freed the doctrine from the 
semblance of harshness and arbitrariness and imparted to it a more purely ethico-religious 
character.
For, all affinity and agreement notwithstanding, Calvin differed from Luther and Zwingli. 
He shared neither the emotional nature of the one nor the humanistic inclinations of the other. 
When, in a manner as yet but very imperfectly known to us, he was converted, this experience 
was immediately accompanied by such a clear, deep and harmonious insight into Christian truth 
as to render any subsequent modification unnecessary. The first edition of the Institutio which 
appeared in March, 1536, was expanded and increased in the later issues, but it never changed, 
and the task which, in his view, the Reformation had to accomplish, remained from beginning to 
end  his  own  goal  in  life.  While  Luther's  faith  was  almost  entirely  absorbed  in  the  fides 
justificans, and while Zwingli one-sidedly defined faith as fides vivificans or regenerans, Calvin 
widened the conception to that of fides salvificans,—a faith which renews the entire man in his 
being and consciousness, in soul and body, in all his relations and activities, and hence a faith 
which exercises its sanctifying influence in the entire range of life, upon Church and school, 
upon  society  and  state,  upon  science  and  art.  But  in  order  to  be  able  to  perform  this 
comprehensive task,—in order to be truly, always and everywhere a  fides salvificans, it was 
necessary for faith first of all to be fully assured of itself, and no longer to be tossed to and fro by 
every wind of doubt. This explains why, more than with Zwingli and Luther, faith is with Calvin 
unshaken conviction, firm assurance.
But if faith is to be such an unshaken assurance it must rest on a truth removed from all 
possibility of doubt; it must attest itself as real by its own witness and power in the heart of man. 
A house that will defy the tempest cannot be built on the sand. Behind faith, therefore, must lie 
the truth, the will and act of God. In other words, faith is the fruit or effect of election; it is the 
experience of an act of God. Always and everywhere Calvin recurs to this will of God. The world 
with its infinite multitude of phenomena, with its diversities and inequalities, its disharmonies 
and contrasts, is not to be explained from the will of the creature nor from the worth or 
unworthiness  of  man.  It  is  true,  inequality  and  contrast  appear  most  pronounced  in  the 
allotment of man's eternal destiny. They are, however, by no means confined to this, but show 
themselves in every sphere, in the different places of habitation appointed for men, in the 
different gifts and powers conferred upon them in body and soul, in the difference between 
health and sickness, wealth and poverty, prosperity and adversity, joy and sorrow, in the varying 
ranks and vocations, and, last of all, in the fact itself that men are men and not animals. Let the 
opponents of the doctrine of election, therefore, answer the question, cur homines sint magis 
quam boves aut asini, cur, quum in Dei manu esset canes ipsos fingere, ad imaginem suam  
formavit. The more we reflect upon the world the more we are forced to fall back upon the 
hidden will of God and find in it the ultimate ground for both the existence of the world and its 
being what it is. All the standards of goodness and justice and righteous recompense and 
retribution for evil which we are accustomed to apply, prove wholly inadequate to measure the 
world. The will of God is, and from the nature of the case must be, the deepest cause of the entire 
world and of all the varietas and diversitas found in it. There is no more ultimate ground for 
this than the absconditum Dei consilium. The unfathomable mystery of the world compels the 
intellect and the heart, theology and philosophy alike to fall back upon the will of God and seek 
rest in it.
It frequently happens, however, that theology and philosophy are not contented with this. 
They then endeavor, after the manner of Plato and Hegel, to offer a rational explanation of the 
world. Or, while falling back upon the will of God, they make out of this will a buqoj a`gnwstoj, 
as is done by Gnosticism, or a blind, irrational and unhappy will, as is done by Schopenhauer, or 
an unconscious and unknowable power, as is done by von Hartmann and Spencer. By his 
Christian faith Calvin was kept from these different forms of pantheism. It is true, Calvin 
upholds with the utmost energy the sovereignty of the divine will over and against all human 
reasoning. Predestination belongs to the divinae sapientiae adyta which man may not enter and 
in regard to which his curiosity must remain unsatisfied; for they form a labyrinth from which 
no one can find the exit. Man may not even investigate with impunity the things God meant to 
keep secret. God wants us to adore, not to comprehend, the majesty of His wisdom. Nevertheless 
God  is  not  exlex.  He  sufficiently  vindicates  His  justice  by  convicting  of  guilt  those  who 
blaspheme Him in their own consciences. His will is not absolute power, but ab omni vitio pura, 
summa perfectionis regula, etiam legum omnium lex. And the Gospel reveals to us what is the 
content, the heart and the kernel, as it were, of this will.
For since the Fall nature no longer reveals to us God's paternal favor. On every side it 
proclaims the divine curse which cannot but fill our guilty souls with despair.  Ex mundi 
conspectu Patrem colligere non licet. Aside from the special revelation in Christ, man has no 
true knowledge of heavenly things. He is ignorant and blind as respects God, His fatherhood and 
His law as the rule of life. Especially of the  divinae erga nos benevolentiae certitudo he is 
without the faintest consciousness, for human reason neither can attain nor strives to attain to 
this truth, and therefore fails to understand quis sit verus Deus, qualisve erga nos esse velit. 
And herein precisely consists the essence of God's special revelation in Christ, and this is the 
central content of the Gospel: God here makes Himself known to us not merely as our Creator, 
but  as  our  Redemptor. He does not  here tell  us what He is, to  enable us to  indulge  in 
speculation, but causes us to know  qualis sit et quid ejus naturae conveniat. The  gratuita 
promissio, the promissio misericordiae, the liberalis legatio qua sibi Deus mundum reconciliat,
—these constitute the essence of the Gospel and the firm foundation of faith. He is a true 
believer, who, firmly convinced that God is to  him a gracious and loving Father, expects 
everything from His loving-kindness.  Fidelis non est, nisi qui suae salutis securitati innixus, 
diabolo et morti confidenter insultet.
This concentration of the Gospel in the promise of divine mercy not only provided Calvin 
with a firm footing in the midst of the shifting opinions of his time, but also widened his outlook 
and enlarged his sympathies, so that, while resolutely standing by his own confession, he 
nevertheless perpetually mediated the things that made for unity and peace among all the sons 
of the Reformation. To be sure, the conception usually formed of Calvin differs widely from this. 
His image as commonly portrayed has for its only features those of cruel severity and despotic 
intolerance. But such a conception does grave injustice to the Genevan Reformer. Unfortunately, 
he must be held responsible for the death of Servetus, although in this respect he only stands on 
a level with the other Reformers, none of whom had entirely outgrown all the errors of their age. 
But the Calvin who gave his approval to the execution of Servetus is not the only Calvin we 
know. There is also a far different Calvin, one who was united with his friends in the bonds of 
the most tender affection, whose heart went out in sympathy to all his suffering and struggling 
brethren in the faith, one who identified himself with their lot, and supplied them with comfort 
and  courage  and  cheer  in  their  severest  afflictions.  We  know  of  a  Calvin  who  without 
intermission labored most earnestly for the union of the divided Protestants, who sought God in 
His Word alone and was unwilling to bind himself even to such terms as "Trinity" and "Person", 
who refused to subscribe to the Nicene and Athanasian creeds, who discountenanced every 
disruption of the Church on the ground of minor impurities of doctrine, who favored fraternal 
tolerance  in  all  questions  touching  the  form  of  worship.  There  was  a  Calvin,  who, 
notwithstanding  all  differences  of  opinion,  cherished  the  highest  regard  for  Luther, 
Melanchthon and Zwingli, and recognized them as servants of God; who himself subscribed to 
the Augsburg Confession and, reserving the right of private interpretation, acknowledged it as 
the expression of his own faith; who recommended the Loci of Melanchthon, although differing 
from him on the points of free-will and predestination; who refused to confine the invisible 
Church to any single confession, but recognized its presence wherever God works by His Word 
and Spirit in the hearts of men.
Still another injustice, however, must be laid to the charge of the average conception of 
Calvin. Men sometimes speak as if Calvin knew of nothing else to preach but the decree of 
predestination with its two parts of election and reprobation. The truth is that no preacher of the 
Gospel has ever surpassed Calvin in the free, generous proclamation of the grace and love of 
God. He was so far from putting predestination to the front, that in the Institutio the subject 
does not receive treatment until the third book, after the completion of the discussion of the life 
of faith. It is entirely wanting in the  Confessio of 1536 and is only mentioned in passing, in 
connection  with  the  Church,  in  the  Catechismus  Genevensis of  1545.  And  as  regards 
reprobation, before accusing Calvin, the charge should be laid against Scripture, against the 
reality of life, against the testimony of conscience; for all these bear witness that there is sin in 
the world, and that this awful reality, this decretum horribile, cannot have its deepest ground in 
the free will of man. And there are still other features in Calvin's doctrine of reprobation to 
which attention should be called. There is in the first place the fact that he says so little about the 
working of reprobation. The Institutio is a work characterized by great sobriety, wholly free from 
scholastic abstruseness; it everywhere treats the doctrines of faith in the closest connection with 
the practice of religion. This is especially true of eschatology. As is well known, Calvin never 
could bring himself to write a commentary on the Apocalypse, and in his Institutio he devotes to 
"the last things"; only a few paragraphs. He avoids all spinosae quaestiones with reference to the 
state of glory, and interprets the descriptions given by Scripture of the state of the lost as 
symbolical: darkness, weeping, gnashing of teeth, unquenchable fire, the worm that dies not,—
all these serve to impress upon us quam sit calamitosum alienari ab omni Dei societate, and 
majestatem Dei ita sentire tibi adversam ut effugere nequeas quin ab ipsa urgearis. The 
punishment of hell consists in exclusion from fellowship with God and admits of degrees. In 
connection with Paul's words, that at last God will be all in all, it is not forbidden to think of the 
devil and the godless, since in their subjection also the glory of God shall be revealed.
But of even greater significance is it that with Calvin reprobation does not mean the 
withholding of all grace. Although man through sin has been rendered blind to all the spiritual 
realities of the kingdom of God, so that a special revelation of God's fatherly love in Christ and a 
specialis illuminatio by the Holy Spirit in the hearts of the sinners here become necessary, 
nevertheless there exists alongside of these a  generalis gratia which dispenses to all men 
various gifts. If God had not spared man, his fall would have involved the whole of nature in 
ruin. As it was, God immediately after the Fall interposed, in order by His common grace to curb 
sin and to uphold in being the  universitas rerum. For after all sin is rather an  adventitia 
qualitas than a substantialis proprietas, and for this reason God is operis sui corruptioni magis 
infensus quam operi suo. Although for man's sake the whole of nature is subject to vanity, 
nevertheless nature is upheld by the hope which God implanted in its heart. There is no part of 
the world in which some spark of the divine glory does not glimmer. Though it be a metaphorical 
mode of expression, since God should not be confounded with nature, it may be affirmed in a 
truly religious sense that nature is God. Heaven and earth with their innumerable wonders are a 
magnificent display of the divine wisdom.
Especially the human race is still a clear mirror of the operation of God, an exhibition of 
His manifold gifts. In every man there is still a seed of religion, a consciousness of God, wholly 
ineradicable, convincing all of the heavenly grace on which their life depends, and leading even 
the heathen to name God the Father of mankind. The supernatural gifts have been lost, and the 
natural gifts have become corrupted, so that man by nature no longer knows who and what God 
seeks to be to him. Still these latter gifts have not been withdrawn entirely from man. Reason 
and judgment and will, however corrupt, yet, in so far as they belong to man's nature, have not 
been wholly lost. The fact that men are found either wholly or in part deprived of reason, proves 
that the tithe to these gifts is not self-evident and that they are not distributed to men on the 
basis of merit. Nonetheless, the grace of God imparts them to us. The reason whereby man 
distinguishes between truth and error, good and evil, and forms conceptions and judgments, and 
also the will which is inseparable from human nature as the faculty whereby man strives after 
what he deems good for himself,—these raise him above the animals. Consequently it is contrary 
to Scripture as well as to experience to attribute to man such a perpetual blindness as would 
render him unable to form any true conception. On the contrary, there is light still shining in the 
darkness, men still retain a degree of love for the truth, some sparks of the truth have still been 
preserved. Men  carry in  themselves the principles of the laws which  are  to  govern  them 
individually and in their association with one another. They agree in regard to the fundamentals 
of justice and equity, and everywhere exhibit an aptness and liking for social order. Sometimes a 
remarkable sagacity is given to men whereby they are not only able to learn certain things, but 
also to make important inventions and discoveries, and to put these to practical use in life. 
Owing to all this, not only is an orderly civil society made possible among men, but arts and 
sciences develop, which are not to be despised. For these should be considered gifts of the Holy 
Spirit. It is true the Holy Spirit as a spirit of sanctification dwells in believers only, but as a spirit 
of life, of wisdom and of power He works also in those who do not believe. No Christian, 
therefore, should despise these gifts; on the contrary, he should honor art and science, music 
and philosophy and various other products of the human mind as  praestantissima Spiritus 
dona, and make the most of them for his own personal use. Accordingly, in the moral sphere 
also distinctions are to be recognized between some men and others. While all are corrupt, not 
all are fallen to an equal depth; but there are sins of ignorance and sins of mallice. There is a 
difference between Camillus and Catiline. Even to sinful man sometimes speciosae dotes and 
speciales Dei gratiae are granted. In common parlance it is even permissible to say that one 
man has been born bene, another pravae naturae. Nay, every man has to acknowledge in the 
talents entrusted to him a specialis or peculiaris Dei gratia. In the diversity of all these gifts we 
see the remnants of the divine image whereby man is distinguished from all other creatures.
In view of all these utterances, which it would be easy to increase and enforce from the 
other works of Calvin, it is grossly unjust to charge the Reformer with narrow-mindedness and 
intolerance. It is, of course, a different question whether Calvin himself possessed talent and 
aptness for all these arts and sciences to which he accords praise. But even if this be not so, even 
if he did not possess the love for music and singing which distinguished Luther, this is not to his 
discredit, for not only has every genius its limitations, but the Reformers were and had to be by 
vocation men of faith, and for having excelled in this they deserve our veneration and praise, no 
less than the men of art and science. Calvin affirms, it is true, that the virtues of the natural man, 
however noble, do not suffice for justification at the judgment-bar of God, but this is due to his 
profound conviction of the majesty and spiritual character of the moral law. Aside from this, he 
is more generous in his recognition of what is true and good, wherever it be found, than any 
other Reformer. He surveys the entire earth and finds everywhere the evidence of the divine 
goodness, wisdom and power. Calvins teleological standpoint does not render him narrow in his 
sympathies, but rather gives to his mind the stamp of catholicity.
This appears with equal clearness from the calling which he assigns to the Christian. In 
regard to this also Calvin takes his point of departure in the will of God. To the Romanist view he 
brings in principle the same objection that bears against the pagan conception: the doctrine of 
the meritoriousness of good works is a delusion; the monastic vows are an infringement of 
Christian liberty; the perfection striven after by this method is an arbitrary ideal, set up by man 
himself. Romanism and paganism both minimize the corruption of human nature, and in the 
matter of good works start from the free will of man. In contradistinction to this Calvin proceeds 
on the principle: nostri non sumus, Dei sumus. The Christian's life ought to be one continual 
sacrifice, a perfect consecration to God, a service of God's name, obedience to His law, a pursuit 
of His glory. This undivided consecration to God assumes on earth largely the character of self-
denial and cross-bearing. Paganism knows nothing of this; it merely prescribes certain moral 
maxims and strives to bring man's life into subjection to his reason or will, or to nature. But the 
Christian subjects also his intellect and his will and all his powers to the law of God. He does not 
resign himself to the inevitable, but commits himself to the heavenly Father, who is not like unto 
a philosopher preaching virtue, but is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The result is that for Calvin the passive virtues of submission, humility, patience, self-
denial, cross-bearing stand in the foreground. Like St. Augustine, Calvin is mortally afraid of 
pride, whereby man exalts himself above God. His strong insistence upon the inability of man 
and the bondage of the will is not for the purpose of plunging man into despair, but in order to 
raise him from his lethargy and to awaken in him the longing for what he lacks, to make him 
renounce all self-glorying and self-reliance and put all his confidence in God alone. Calvin strips 
man of everything in order to restore unto him all things in God. Quanto magis in te infirmus 
es, tanto magis te suscipit Dominus; nostra humilitas ejus altitudo. Humilitas thus becomes the 
first virtue; it grows on the root of election; we are continually taught it by God in all the 
adversity and crucifixion of the present life; it places us for the first time in the proper relation 
towards God and our fellowman. For it reconciles us to the fact that this life is for us a land of 
pilgrimage, full of perils and afflictions, and teaches us to surrender ourselves in all things to the 
will of God: Dominus ita voluit, ergo ejus voluntatem sequamur. It likewise teaches us to love 
our neighbor, to value the gifts bestowed upon him and to employ our own gifts for his benefit.
Still it would be a mistake to imagine that according to Calvin the Christian life is 
confined to the practice of the passive virtues. It is true, he often speaks of despising the present 
and contemplating the future life. But on considering the times in which Calvin lived, the 
persecution and oppression to which the Reformation was exposed in well-nigh every country, 
the bodily and mental suffering the Reformer himself had to endure,—on considering all this we 
cannot wonder that he exhorts the faithful before all things to the exercise of humility and 
submission, to patience and obedience, to self-denial and cross-bearing. This has always been so 
in the Christian Church, and may be traced back to the teaching of Jesus and the Apostles. It 
does not speak favorably for the depth and intensity of our spiritual life, if we are inclined to find 
fault with Calvin, the other Reformers, and the martyrs of the Church for this alleged one-
sidedness of their faith. It rather should excite our admiration that, in the midst of such 
circumstances, they so largely kept still an eye open for the positive vocation of the Christian. 
With Calvin at least the reverse side to the attitude thus criticized is not wanting. Nor does it 
appear merely after an incidental fashion, by way of appendix to his ethics; it is the outcome of 
his own most individual principle; its root again lies in his conception of the will of God.
As is universally acknowledged, we owe to Luther the restoration of mans natural calling 
to a place of honor. Calvin, however, carried this principle enunciated by his predecessors to its 
furthermost consequences. He viewed the whole of life from the standpoint of the will of God 
and placed it in all its extent under the discipline of the divine law. It was the common 
conviction of the Reformers that Christian perfection must be realized not above and outside of, 
but within the sphere of the calling assigned us by God here on earth. Perfection consists neither 
in compliance with arbitrary human or ecclesiastical commandments, nor in the performance of 
all sorts of extraordinary activities. It consists in the faithful discharge of their ordinary daily 
duties which have been laid by God upon every man in the conduct of life. But much more 
strongly than Luther, Calvin emphasizes the idea that life itself in its whole length and breadth 
and depth must be a service of God. Life acquires for him a religious character, is subsumed 
under and becomes a part of the Kingdom of God. Or, as Calvin himself repeatedly formulates it: 
Christian life is always and everywhere a life in the presence of God, a walking before His face,—
coram ipso ambulare, ac si essemus sub ejus oculis.
When, therefore, Calvin speaks of despising the present life, he means by this something 
far different from what was meant by medieval ethics. He does not mean that life ought to be 
fled from, suppressed, or mutilated, but wishes to convey the idea that the Christian should not 
give his heart to this vain, transitory life, but should possess everything as not possessing it, and 
put his confidence in God alone. But life in itself is a benedictio Dei and comprises many divina 
beneficia. It is for believers a means to prepare them far the heavenly salvation. It should be 
hated only quatenus nos peccato teneat obnoxios, and this hatred should never relate to life as 
such. On the contrary, this life and the vocation in it given us by God are a part which we have 
no right to abandon, but which without murmuring and impatience we must faithfully guard, so 
long as God Himself does not relieve us. So to view life, as a  vocatio Dei,—this is the first 
principle, the foundation of all moral action; this imparts unity to our life and symmetry to all its 
parts; this assigns to each one his individual place and task, and provides the precious comfort 
quod  nullum  erit  tam  sordidum  ac  vile  opus,  quod  non  coram  Deo  resplendeat  et  
pretiosissimum habeatur.
Thus Calvin sees the whole of life steeped in the light of the divine glory. As in all nature 
there is no creature which does not reflect the divine perfection, so in the rich world of men 
there is no vocation so simple, no labor so mean, as not to be suffused with the divine splendor 
and subservient to the glory of God's name. And Calvin applies this point of view to a still wider 
range. All the possessions of life are after the same manner rescued from the dishonor to which 
ascetic moralism had abandoned them. To be sure, he protests against defiling the conscience in 
the use of these possessions and insists upon it that the Christian should be actuated by 
praesentis  vitae  contemptu  et  immortalitatis  meditatione.  But  he  maintains  with  equal 
emphasis that all these possessions are gifts of God, designed not merely to provide for our 
necessities, but also bestowed for our enjoyment and delight. When God adorns the earth with 
trees and plants and flowers, when He causes the vine to grow which makes glad the heart of 
man, when He permits man to dig from out the earth the precious metals and stones which 
shine in the light of the sun,—all this proves that God does not mean to restrict the use of earthly 
possessions to  the  relief  of our absolute necessities,  but  has given  them  to  man  also  for 
enjoyment of life. Prosperity, abundance and luxury also are gifts of God, to be enjoyed with 
gratitude and moderation. And Calvin does not want to bind the conscience with regard to this 
to rigid rules, but expects it freely to regulate itself by the general principles laid dawn in 
Scripture for this purpose.
It must be admitted that the Reformer of Geneva did not always adhere in practice 
consistently to this golden rule. Instead of leaving room for individual liberty he endeavored to 
bring the entire compass of life under definite rules. The Consistory had for its task invigilare 
gregi Domini ut Deus pure colatur and had to exercise censorship over every improper word 
and every wrong act; it had to watch over orthodoxy and church-attendance, to be on the 
lookout  for  Romish  customs  and  wordily  amusements,  to  oversee  domestic  life  and  the 
education of children; it had to keep its eyes on the tradesman in his store, on the craftsman in 
his workshop, on the merchant in the market-place, and to subject the entire range of life to the 
strictest  discipline.  Even  regulations  for  fire-departments  and  night-watches,  for  market-
facilities and street-cleaning, for trade and industry, for the prosecution of law-suits and the 
administration of justice are to be found among Calvin's writings. It is possible to justify all these 
measures in view of the circumstances under which they were introduced in Geneva. But nobody 
can deny that Calvin went too far in the creation of a moral police of this kind, that he 
introduced a régime which, while perhaps necessary and productive of excellent results for that 
age, is yet unsuited to other times and to different conditions.
But this criticism of Calvin's practice by no means detracts from the glory of the principle 
proclaimed by him. What he advocates in imitation of Zwingli was not a mere religious and 
ecclesiastical reform, but a moral reformation embracing the whole of life. Both Zwingli and 
Calvin waged war not merely against the Judaistic self-righteousness of the Roman Church, but 
assailed with equal vigor all pagan license. Both desired a national life in all its parts inspired 
and directed by the principles of the divine Word. And both were led to this view by their 
theological principle; they took their point of departure in all their thought and activity in God, 
walked with Him through all of life and brought back to God as an offering all they were and 
had. Behind everything the sovereign will of God lies hidden and works. The content, the kernel 
of this will is made known to us in the Gospel; from it we know that God is a merciful and 
gracious Father, who in spite of all opposition proposes to Himself the salvation of the Church, 
the redemption of the world, the glorification of His perfections. But this will of God is not an 
impotent desire, it is omnipotent energy. It realizes itself in the faith of the elect; true faith is an 
experience of the work of God in one's soul, and for this reason affords unshakable assurance, 
immovable confidence, the power to surmount all pain and peril through communion with God. 
Through this gracious and omnipotent will of God is made known in the Gospel alone and 
experienced in faith only, nevertheless it does not stand isolated, but is encompassed, supported 
and reinforced by the operation of the same will in the world at large. Special grace is encircled 
by common grace; the vocation which comes to us in faith is connected and connects us with the 
vocation presented to us in our earthly calling; the election revealed to us in faith through this 
faith communicates its power to our entire life; the God of creation and of regeneration is one. 
Hence the believer cannot rest contented in his faith, but must make it the point of vantage from 
which he mounts up to the source of election and presses forward to the conquest of the entire 
world.
History has demonstrated that the belief in election, provided it be genuine, that is, a 
heartfelt conviction of faith, does not produce careless or Godless men. Especially as developed 
and professed by Calvin, it is a principle which cuts off all Romish error at the root. Whereas 
with Rome special revelation consists primarily in the disclosure of certain mysteries, with 
Calvin it receives for its content the gracious fatherly will of God realizing itself through the 
Word of revelation. With Rome faith is nothing more than an intellectual assent, preparing man 
for grace on the principle of meritum congrui; with Calvin faith is the reception of grace itself, 
experience of the power of God, undoubting assurance of God, through and through religious in 
its nature. With Rome grace chiefly serves the purpose of strengthening the will of man and 
qualifying him for the performance of various meritorious good works prescribed by the Church; 
with Calvin the grace received through faith raises man to the rank of an organ of the divine will 
and causes him to walk in accordance with this will before the presence of God and for the divine 
glory. The Reformation as begun by Luther and Zwingli, and reinforced and carried through by 
Calvin, put an end to the Romish supernaturalism and dualism and asceticism. The divine will 
which created the world, which in the state of sin preserves it through common grace and makes 
itself known through special grace as the will of a merciful and gracious Father, aims at the 
salvation of the world, and itself through its omnipotent energy brings about this salvation. 
Because it thus placed the whole of life under the control of the divine will, it was possible for 
Calvin's ethics to fall into two precise regulations, into rigorism and puritanism; but in principle 
his ethics is diametrically apposed to all asceticism, it is catholic and universal in its scope.
In order to prove this by one striking example attention may be called to the fact that 
medieval ethics consistently disapproved the principle of usury on the ground of its being 
forbidden by Scripture and contrary to the unproductive nature of money. Accordingly it looked 
with contempt upon trade and commerce. Luther, Melanchthon, Zwingli and Erasmus adhered 
to this view, but Calvin, when this important problem had been submitted to him, formulated in 
a classic document the grounds on which it could be affirmed that a reasonable interest is 
neither in conflict with Scripture nor with the nature of money. He took into account the law of 
life under which commerce operates and declared that only the sins of commerce are to be 
frowned upon, whereas commerce itself is to be regarded as a calling well-pleasing to God and 
profitable to society. And this merely illustrates the point of view from which Calvin habitually 
approached the problems of life. He found the will of God revealed not merely in Scripture, but 
also in the world, and he traced the connection and sought to restore the harmony between 
them.  Under  the  guidance  of  the  divine  Word  he  distinguished  everywhere  between  the 
institution of God and human corruption, and then sought to establish and restore everything in 
harmony with the divine nature and law. Nothing is unclean in itself; every part of the world and 
every calling in life is a revelation of the divine perfections, so that even the humblest day 
laborer fulfills a divine calling. This is the democratic element in the doctrine of Calvin: there is 
with God no acceptance of persons; all men are equal before Him; even the humblest and 
meanest workman, if he be a believer, fills a place in the Kingdom of God and stands as a 
colaborer with God in  His presence.  But—and  this is the aristocratic, reverse side to  the 
democratic view—every creature and every calling has its own peculiar nature: Church and state, 
the family and society, agriculture and commerce, art and science are all institutions and gifts of 
God, but each in itself is a special revelation of the divine will and therefore possesses its own 
nature. The unity and the diversity in the whole world alike point back to the one sovereign, 
omnipotent, gracious and merciful will of God.
In this spirit Calvin labored in Geneva. But his activity was not confined to the territory of 
one city. Geneva was to Calvin merely the center, from which he surveyed the entire field of the 
Reformation in all lands. When his only child was taken away from him by death, he consoled 
himself with the thought that God had given him numerous children after the Spirit. And so it 
was indeed. Through an extensive correspondence he kept in touch with his fellow-laborers in 
the work of the Reformation; all questions were referred to him; he was the councillor of all the 
leaders of the great movement; he taught hundreds of men and trained them in his spirit. From 
all quarters refugees came to Geneva, that bulwark against Rome, to seek protection and 
support, and afterwards returned to their own lands inspired with new courage. Thus Calvin 
created in many lands a people who, while made up from all classes, nobles and plain citizens, 
townspeople and countryfold, were yet one in the consciousness of a divine vocation. In this 
consciousness they took up the battle against tyranny in Church and state alike, and in that 
contest secured liberties and rights which are still ours at the present day. Calvin himself stood 
in the forefront of this battle. Life and doctrine with him were one. He gave his body a living, 
holy sacrifice, well-pleasing unto God through Jesus Christ. Therein consisted his reasonable 
service. Cor Deo mactatum offero.
Marked up by Lance George Marshall


